PROFESSOR: All right. So today we are going to start by reviewing income and substitution effects.
Because that's a pretty hard concept and pretty central to a lot of what we'll do for the rest of the
semester. And then we're going to dive in and talk about an application, a more interesting application,
of income and substitution effects which is the effects of wages on labor supply.
So let's review. If you take the handout, grab the handout and look at the first figure, it's the same as the
last figure of the previous lecture. To review, remember, whenever the price changes, a price change
can be decomposed into two effects, the substitution effect and the income effect. The substitution
effect is the change in the quantity demanded when the price changes, holding utility constant.
And as we proved last time, that is always negative, 0 or negative. It is always non-positive. It's always
true that when a price goes up, the substitution effect is negative. We proved that both mathematically
and graphically last time showing that if you're going to hold utility constant, and the price of a good is
going to go up, you're going to shift away from that good. OK. That's the substitution effect.
In our example, we showed graphically how you measure a substitution effect. You draw a new
imaginary budget constraint, BC3, which is parallel to the new budget constraint, BC2. So it's got the
new price ratio but tangent to the old indifference curve.
So the key thing to understand is the imaginary budget constraint, BC3, where it comes from. It's parallel
to the new budget constraint. That is it's got the new marginal rate of transformation, the new slope,
but it's tangent to the old indifference curve. That gets you to point B. And so the movement from A to B
is the substitution effect.
Then we have an income effect which is, in fact, utility isn't held constant when prices change. In fact,
utility falls, because you're effectively poorer. You're effectively poorer. Utility is falling. And since you're 
effectively poorer, that further reduces demand if the good is normal. So if it's a normal good, if it's a
good where lower income causes less consumption of it, the fact that you're effectively poorer further
lowers the consumption from point B to point C.
So the total price effect is the one we demonstrated at the beginning of the last lecture. We raised the
price of movies from $8 to $12. And we saw the number of movies consumed fell from 6 to 4. But what
we can see now to understand what's underneath that is two things, an effect of the fact that prices
change holding utility constant, and the fact that you're effectively poorer.
And that's the key thing. No, your income hasn't actually gone down. But that $96 your parents gave you
can buy you less. Your opportunity set has been restricted. And that makes you effectively poorer. And
so you buy less for that reason. And so you get the total movement from A to C.
Now, as we emphasized last time, this will be the case if it's a normal good. So substitution effects are
done. Substitute effects are always negative, nothing fun about that. Income effects are a little more
interesting, because goods can be not normal but inferior. We have inferior goods which are ones such
that they're crummy stuff that as your income goes up, you want less of it.
And that can change the analysis. So if we look at Figure 7-2, now we're talking about the price change
with an inferior good. And now imagine someone choosing between steak and potatoes. So now the
choice is between steak and potatoes. And steak costs $5 a pound, initially, and potatoes cost $1 a
pound. Initially, you have an income of $25. So someone has an income of y equals $25. The price of
steak is $5, and the price of potatoes is $1.
So your budget constraint, your original BC1, runs from you can either have 5 steak, or 25 potatoes, or
something in between. And so individuals choose point A where they're consuming 8.3 potatoes. They
choose point A.
I don't know what the number of steaks is. We probably also ought to label that, the number of steaks
that comes from that. But whatever. It comes out of the utility function. So then we say, now let's
imagine that the price of potatoes rises to $3 a pound. There's a blight on the potatoes like there was in
Ireland in the 1800s. There's a potato blight, and that shifts in the supply curve for potatoes raising the
price of potatoes from $1 a pound to $3 a pound. 
Now, what we know is that that will move consumers, given the utility function that we've chosen here,
that will move consumers from point A to point C. Once again, that's not labeled, but some lower
amount of potatoes. That will move them from point A to point C. So, ultimately, they'll choose fewer
potatoes and fewer steaks.
But, in fact, what we can see is that's the composition of a substitution effect which is negative, and an
income effect which is positive.
So if we do our standard decomposition, we draw a new monetary budget constraint BC3. It's parallel to
the new budget constraint, BC2, so the same price ratio. It's parallel. But it's tangent to the old
indifference curve at point B which is actually to the left of the ultimate choice at point C.
So the substitution effect takes us from A to B. The income effect actually takes us back from B to C.
That is as that budget constraint shifts from BC3 to BC2, as you get poorer, you choose more potatoes.
So the substitution effect would say that from the price change of potatoes alone, we go all the way to
point B. We massively reduce our consumption of potatoes.
But because we're poorer, effectively, we now consume more potatoes. Because we're effectively
poorer, we now consume more potatoes. And so, on net, you get a reduction in potato consumption.
But it offsets the substitution effect. So that's when income effects can be a little more interesting. It's
going to be a little more interesting exercise.
When you think about substitute effects in the same way, it's not that interesting. It's just look, quantity
fell. It doesn't really matter why. You don't see, in the real world, substitution income effects. What's
interesting is when they're opposed to each other. That's when it gets more interesting. And so you see
this small reduction you get from the substitution effect alone.
By the way, there's two handouts. Right? Jessica, is there two handouts? There should be. There's tables
as well. I didn't actually get it. Jessica, grab me one of those. There's tables as well as graphs. So make
sure you have both handouts. Anyone else need tables? Am I the only one who didn't get it? OK, good. 
So, in principle, the income effect could be so large it could offset the substitution effect. There's no
reason, theoretically, that couldn't happen. That is, in principle, you could derive preferences such that
the income effect is so large it offsets the substitution effect-- thank you-- and the price increase
actually leads to more potatoes being consumed. That is what we'd call a Giffen good as I talked about
last time.
So if you look at the table, the top table, this sort of lays out our possibilities. So look at the top table. It
sort of maps out the possible sets of things that can happen. So if we have a normal good, and the price
of that good rises, then we know that the substitution effect is negative. The income effect is negative.
So the total effect is negative. Quantity falls. That's the law of demand. We talked about that last time,
downward sloping demand curves.
Likewise, if the price falls, the substitution effect is positive. The income effect is positive. You're now
richer because the price of the good fell. And so, therefore, demand goes up. Quantity consumed goes
up, once again, downward sloping demand curve. Price rises, you consume less of it. Price falls, you
consume more of it. That's what we learned about in the first lecture.
However, once goods are inferior, all bets are off. Because now the income effect is the opposite sign of
the substitution effect. It's possible it could be larger. So the total effect is ambiguous. You could actually
get an upward sloping demand curve. You could actually get that a price rise leads to more of a good,
and a fall leads to less of a good. Now will you? Only if it's a Giffen good. And, in fact, there's a lot of
controversy in economics about whether any good in the world has ever been a Giffen good. At most,
there's maybe one or two examples people can find. Even then, it's controversial.
So I think it's fine in life to assume that demand curves slope down. I think, in fact, I don't see convincing
evidence that any subset or set of goods are Giffen goods. I think it's just generally fine it life to assume
demand curves slope down. Nonetheless, it's important to understand this theoretical possibility even if
it's just theoretical. Because it's important to understand income and substitution effects. OK. Questions
about that, either on substitution effect or price changes? OK./
So now, armed with that, let's go onto the more interesting case which is labor supply. It's more
interesting, because as I'll come to in a few minutes, we talk about labor supply, labor is typically going
to be an inferior good. So things are going to get a little more interesting. So let's talk about that. 
So the question you want to ask here is how hard do folks decide to work? How many hours of labor do
folks decide to provide? As we talked about when we talked about minimum wage, just as we all have to
decide between consuming pizza and consuming movies, or consuming steak and consuming potatoes,
we also have to decide between how much labor we're going to provide and how much we're going to
consume.
The more labor you provide to the market, the more you consume, but the less fun you get to have. Fun,
we call leisure. The less labor you provide to the market, the more fun you get to have, the more leisure
you get, but the less you get to consume, because you have less income. And that's the trade-off we
talked about when we talked about the effect of minimum wage.
Now let's come back and get underneath that labor supply curve. So we talked about the minimum
wage. We talked about the labor supply curve which was how the hours you provide respond to the
wage and a labor demand curve, which was how the hours that firms want respond to the wage.
Now let's get underneath the supply curve. A minute ago, we were talking about the demand curves and
getting underneath the demand curve for consumers. Well, now let's get underneath the supply curve
for labor.
Now, the key thing is that when we talk about labor, it's not a good, it's a bad. The typical person
doesn't want to work. The typical person is not in this room. You guys like to work. The typically person
actually doesn't like to work.
Leisure is a normal good. For the typical person, leisure is a normal good. They like time off. Leisure is a
good, which means labor is a bad. They don't like to work.
The problem is we don't know how to model bads in economics. It's just we're used to trading off
between two things you want. When I used to trade-off, we know how to model something you want to
get something you don't want. Indifference curves wouldn't work, because more wouldn't be better. If
you drew an indifference curve for labor, it would violate the more is better assumption. Because you
wouldn't want more. You'd want less. 
So the modeling trick we're going to use whenever we're modeling bads, is to model the complementary
good and then, in the end, solve for the bad. We're not going to model labor. We're going to model
leisure. And given the total amount of hours you have to supply, the total hours minus the amount of
leisure is the amount of labor. So we're going to model leisure. We're going to model the good and then
solve for labor at the end.
So, in other words, if you have 24 hours a day you can work, then your amount of hours of work is 24
minus the amount of leisure N. Call it N or call it L. We'll call it N because L, typically, we think of as
labor. Let's call leisure N for reasons I don't quite understand. Let's just use that.
Basically the amount of hours you can work is 24 minus leisure. So if we solve for the optimal amount of
leisure you want, we can obviously get the amount of labor you supply. So the trick when modeling a
bad is not to model the bad. It's to model the complementary good. In this case, the complementary
good is leisure.
So we're going to model the trade-off between leisure and consumption and use the result of that to
solve for the amount of labor you supply. So it's the general modeling trick you need to understand,
which is turn a bad into a good. That's the modeling trick. Because we know how to model the trade-off
between two goods. We don't know how to model the trade-off with a bad.
So to think about that, let's go to Figure 7-3, and let's talk about what's underneath a labor supply curve.
What's underneath a labor supply curve is the trade-off between how much leisure you want and how
much consumption you can have. So you see here, here's a trade-off. On the y-axis is the amount of
goods you can have. You earn a wage, w. The y-axis is the amount of goods you can have from a day's
work.
So you earn w per hour. That means the most goods you can have from a day's work is 24w. If you
worked all 24 hours at that wage, you can have 24w goods. On the other hand, if you work not at all,
then you take 24 hours in leisure and have no consumption from that day.
So we see as you move to the right on the x-axis, that's leisure. That's the good. As you move to the left,
that's labor. That's the bad. OK? That's just illustrating. But we're going to model the good. We're going
to model leisure. Your trade-off is between how much you want to consume and how much leisure you
want to take. 
Now, here's what's interesting. In general, what determines the slope of a budget constraint? What
determines the slope of a budget constraint?
AUDIENCE: Marginal rate of transformation.
PROFESSOR: Which is what?
AUDIENCE: Ratio between prices.
PROFESSOR: Ratio between prices. Prices determine the slope of the budget constraint. But here's
what's tricky. What's the price of leisure?
AUDIENCE: Wage.
PROFESSOR: The wage. Why?
AUDIENCE: Because for every hour you take having leisure, you are effectively using money that you
could gain at work.
PROFESSOR: Exactly. The key is the economic concept of opportunity cost, which we've talked about and
will continue to talk about this semester, opportunity cost. By not working, you are forgoing earning a
wage. So that is the price of leisure. You may not think of it this way, but, once again, that's why we're
the dismal science.
When you go home today, and you sit on the couch, and you watch TV for an hour, you have just paid a
price. And that price is what you could have earned by working that hour. Every action has a price. And
the price of leisure is the wage you forgo, The wage you forgo by sitting around is the price of leisure. 
Let's assume here that the price of goods is $1, that the goods you're going to buy cost $1. Whatever
your consumption, it costs $1. That's the trick we always use with modeling. Make as many things $1 as
you can. That makes the model easy. So let's assume that the price of the goods you're going to buy are
$1.
So the slope of the budget constraint is minus w over 1. The slope of the budget constraint is just the
price of leisure which is minus w . So the trade-off with the price of goods of $1, the trade-off between
taking leisure and consuming is that if you take leisure, an hour of leisure, you get w fewer goods. And if
you work an hour, you get w more goods, but you lose an hour of leisure. And that gives you the tradeoff
between how much you consume and how much leisure you take which determines how much you
work. OK. Questions about that?/
Now let's take this framework and ask, what happens when the wage changes, Figure 7-4. So we have
an original outcome with the budget constraint BC1. We have an original budget constraint, BC1. Now
imagine the wage goes up, so we move to BC2. BC2 is a budget constraint with a higher wage. The wage
goes up.
So what we're going to see is you're going to move from point A where you work N1 hours to point C
where you work N3 hours. That's where your indifference curves are tangent with the new budget
constraint. Not work, take leisure. I'm sorry. We take leisure of N1 hours to leisure of N3 hours. The
wage going up has reduced your leisure which makes sense. If the wage goes up, you work harder.
Right?
So your wage going up, we always first take if there's a leisure and then convert to labor. Wage goes up,
leisure falls from N1 to N3, which means labor goes up. But actually two things are happening here, the
substitution and income effect. The substitution effect, which we see by drawing the imaginary budget
constraint BC* which is parallel to BC2 but tangent to the original difference curve, the substitution
effect is a very large reduction in leisure. It moves all the way from N1 to N2. The substitution effect is a
very large reduction in leisure.
The income effect is that leisure is a normal good. I'm now richer, because my wage has gone up. So I
want to buy more of it. So I buy more leisure. And that moves me from N2 to N3. 
So, basically, now the income effect offsets the substitution effect even with a normal good, or with a
normal good. With a normal good, the income effect offsets that substitution effect. And that's because
the money you're getting, you're using to buy leisure.
So, in fact, if you flip to 7-5, you can see a case where the income effect dominates. And you actually get
that a wage increase leads you to work less hard. Now, think about that. If I'd said to you-- I probably
should have started with this-- if you increase the wage, will people work more or less hard? Your initial
instinct would have been more hard. You would have thought, well, if your wage goes up, you work
harder. But that's because your instinct was focused on the substitution effect. You're thinking about
the income effect.
Here's a case where I started at N1. The substitution effect leads me to N2. But I feel so much richer
from that higher wage that I actually move all the way to N3. My leisure goes up, and I work less hard.
Now, unlike a Giffen good, this is totally plausible. Why is it plausible? Well, let me do give you a simple
intuition for why it's plausible.
Let's say that you're someone who has a certain amount of things you want to buy every week. You
don't save. You have a certain amount of things you want to buy every week. You have to pay your rent,
you have to buy your food, you have to buy your other goodies, a certain budget. A lot of people live on
a budget. You have a certain budget. And the truth is you're happy with that budget. That's kind of what
you want to do.
Now let's say I doubled your wage. Well, now to meet the budget you can work half as hard and still
meet the same budget. So you'll work less hard. You could say, look, I can get more leisure and consume
the same amount of goods as I did before. So I'll work less hard.
That's a totally plausible case. That's a case of what we call target income. If someone has a target
income, and their wage goes up, they'll work less. Now, that's not necessarily the truth. But it's, at least
to me, sort of a plausible case of how people might behave. And that's a case where income effects can
dominate. 
So if we, once again, go to the second chart on that page, now we see the income and substitution
effects for labor supply. Once again, we're assuming leisure is a normal good. We're always going to
assume leisure is a normal good. We're never going to assume people don't like leisure. Assuming
leisure is a normal good, then as the wage rises, the substitution effect is you take less leisure.
This table is a bit different than the other table. Instead of the first panel being normal and the second
panel being inferior, the first panel is what happens to leisure. The second panel converts it to what
happens to labor. So for instance, in the first cell, when the wage rises, the substitution effect on leisure
is unambiguously negative. You clearly take less leisure when the wage rises. So, likewise, you have
more labor. So on the bottom panel, labor is clearly greater than or less than 0.
But the income effect is positive for leisure. You're rich, you take more leisure. Or, likewise, negative for
labor, you're richer, so your work less hard. And, therefore, the net is ambiguous.
So with goods consumption, we needed goods to be inferior for there to be a Giffen good type
phenomena. Here, even with leisure being normal, you can have a Giffen good type phenomena. It's
much less random.
And, in some sense, this is why we learn income substitution effects. To be honest, they're just not that
interesting for consumption. The book makes a big deal out of them and talks about consumer price
indices and all that. It's just not that important for consumption. Because we know in consumption if
prices goes up, you consume less. It's just not that interesting.
It's much more interesting for things like labor supply. And we talk about savings in a number of
lectures. It's the same thing. There, it's more interesting. Because now they can often offset each other
in meaningful ways. And so now this is why the tools of income and substitution effects become much
more important. OK?
So if we put this together, if we go to Figure 7-6, we can now think about deriving where labor supply
comes from. Where does labor supply come from? Well, first, you've got the consumer's decision of
how hard to work. 
So here's a case. It's sort of small, but you can take a look. Here's a case where you've got someone
initially working, taking 16 hours of leisure and, therefore, working eight hours, at a wage of W1. Now
their wage goes up to W2. They choose to take 12 hours of leisure and, therefore, work 12 hours. This is
someone who works harder when the wage goes up. That is, the income effect does not offset the
substitution effect.
Now, we can take that to draw a demand for leisure curve just like we drew any other demand curve.
It's the same technique as last time. Just bring those point and say, look, at a wage of W1, leisure is 16.
At a wage of W2, leisure is 12. We have a downward sloping demand for leisure, standard downward
sloping demand for leisure.
But we can convert that to a supply of labor, which is what we care about. Nobody cares about the
demand for leisure curve. We care about the supply of labor curve. You just subtract these from 24. You
use the supply of labor curve which is upward sloping. So as long as substitution effects dominate
income effects, we'll get an upward sloping labor supply curve.
But it's certainly possible that if income effects dominates substitution effects, you could get a
downward sloping supply curve, if you will, what we call in labor economics, a backward-bending supply
curve, a supply curve that goes the wrong way. Instead of sloping up like supply curves are supposed to,
it goes the wrong way and slopes down.
And we can see that's plausible. The target income case I just described to you would deliver that. The
target income case I just described to you would deliver a downward sloping supply of labor. As the
wage rose, people would work less and less.
That's a totally plausible case. And that's why income and substitution effects are interesting. Because
they can deliver this weird result. They can get the wrong signed supply curve. Questions about income
and substitution effects or labor supply?/
So what I want to spend the rest of the lecture on is talking about well, what is the case? Do labor supply
curves slope up or down? And what do we know about that? Well, this is probably the major focus of a
field we call labor economics. And there's an excellent course on labor economics, 14.64 taught by Josh
Angrist, which goes into much detail in the entire field. But one of the main focuses of the field is
understanding the elasticity of labor supply, and is it positive or negative, and how big is it. So, basically, 
measuring the slope of the labor supply curve is the focus of this literature, the elasticity of the labor
supply.
Now, what I want to do is start with a historical fact, and then I'll come to the modern age. Let's think
about 30 years ago. 30 years ago, all men worked and less than half of women worked. It was more
normal for women not to work than to work, married women. I'm sorry. Less than half of married
women worked.
Now, married women could work. I'm not talking 60 years ago or 80 years ago when there were
marriage bars. Literally, firms wouldn't hire you if you were married. It's true. If you're interested in that,
you can actually read Claudia Goldin. She's a labor historian who's written about the early 20th century
when, literally, women could be fired for being married. We're not talking about that era.
I'm talking about 30 years ago when you could work if you were married. It's no problem. But most
women chose not to, maybe 40 years ago now.
So, in that case, let's think about two groups. Let's think about married men, and let's think about
married women. And let's just posit, hypothetically, how big we think their substitution and income
effects would be.
Let's start with substitution effect. Do we think the substitution effect would be bigger? This is the
change in the wage holding utility constant. Do we think that would have a bigger effect on leisure and,
therefore, labor for men or for women and why? Don't yell it out. Somebody, raise their hand and tell
me. Do we think that the substitution effect would be bigger for men or women and why? Remember
the name. It's the substitution effect. That's the key to the answer. Yeah.
AUDIENCE: I think it would be the same, because they each have equal use for the goods. Maybe their
income effect would be different.
PROFESSOR: OK. [UNINTELLIGIBLE PHRASE]. They each have equal use for the goods. Well let's deal with
where the substitution effect comes from. Let's break it down. So you're someone who's deciding.
You've got you and your wife, and you're each deciding how to respond to a change in the wage. Now,
you both value the goods the same. But it's goods versus leisure. 
What's the other feature that you're going to be thinking about? Think about a married man 40 years
ago, and the wage goes down.
AUDIENCE: They have to work more.
PROFESSOR: No. We're just doing substitution effects. That's unambiguous. If the goes down, they work
less. We're just doing substitution effects. That's ambiguous.
The question is, if they work less, what do they do? Whereas think about a married women 40 years
ago. If she works less, what does she do? What does a married man do? Nothing. There's nothing to do.
Your friends are all at work. You can't go play golf. You can't do anything. You don't take care of kids,
because men didn't take care of kids 40 years ago. What do you do? There's nothing to do.
Whereas a woman, married woman, if the wage goes down 40 years ago, you can take care of kids
instead. You can hang out with other women who aren't working. There's plenty to do.
Based on that, now change your answer. Where do you think the substitution effect would be bigger?
AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE PHRASE].
PROFESSOR: In women, it would be bigger. Because men, there's less of a substitution effect. Because
it's all about substitutability of options. There's no good alternative option to work for men 40 years ago.
It's either work or nothing. Basically, everybody worked. So, basically, there's no good substitution effect
option for men.
For women, there's lots of outside options. There's sociability, there's child rearing, et cetera. The
substitution effect will be larger the more things there are you can substitute to. Men don't have
anything to substitute to from work. Women have options to substitute to from work. 
For men, this is going to be very small. For women, this will be big. We know the sign. The smallest this
can be is 0. We know the sign. But it's going to be a very small substitution effect, because I don't have a
lot else to do if my wage goes down. Women, if it's a low wage, why work? You can be much more
effective taking care of the kids or hanging out with your friends. Why work for a low wage? Men,
there's nothing else to do. So that's the relative size to the substitution effects.
Now, the income effect, I think, is a little bit harder. And let's come back and think about what drives an
income effect. We talked about the income effect as being delta q over delta y, how much a quantity
changes when your income changes. But, in reality, what's going to matter for your income effect given
when you start today, is going to be not only delta q over delta y, how your taste for work changed or
income changes, but also how hard you worked to start.
Think of it this way. The income effect is how much richer you feel if your wage goes up, or how much
poorer you feel if your wage goes down. If you are working 0 hours, the income effect is 0. You don't
feel any richer if the wage goes up, because you don't earn any money. The more hours you work the
bigger the income effect is, because the bigger that shock is to you.
So we can think of the income effect, a shorthand for the income effect, is going to be h times dh/dy,
the hours you work times how your hours change with your income. OK? Now, to prove this it involves
using complicated algebra. We're not going to get into it in this course. I worked hard last night to see if I
could make the algebra less complicated, and I can't. I just have to try to work intuitively on this.
The notion of the income effect is bigger the more you're in the market. You can think about it for goods
too. Think about the income effect of a change in the price of something you buy a lot of for something
you buy very little of.
So let's say you're someone who's buying two Starbucks a day, and you very rarely go see a movie. Well,
if the price of a movie goes up 10%, or the price of Starbucks goes up 10%, which is going to make you
feel poorer? The price of Starbucks going up, because you buy a lot of Starbucks. So how much poorer
you'll feel, or the income effect, will depend on your starting point. The more you're in a market, the
more you'll feel the income effect. 
Now, based on that, who's going to have a bigger income effect, men or women? Same person, what do
you think? The income effect is going to be stronger the more you're in the market. So who's going to
have a bigger income effect?
AUDIENCE: Married men would have a bigger income effect.
PROFESSOR: Exactly. Married men would have a bigger income effect, because they're in the market.
Married women, most of them don't work. So there's no income effect. So this is going to be big for men
and small for women.
There's another issue, which is does dh/dy differ for men and women? I'll leave that alone. Let's assume
they both have the same underlying income elasticity. But, certainly, the initial hours are much bigger
from men than for women.
So what does this mean in terms of the labor supply curves you would see for married men and married
women 40 years ago? Based on these facts, what would you think? Yeah?
AUDIENCE: They would have opposite slopes.
PROFESSOR: Yeah. So, in particular, the female labor supply curve would look like what? It would slope
up or down?
AUDIENCE: It would slope up.
PROFESSOR: It would slope up. You'd have an upward sloping curve, because you'd have these big
substitution effects and small income effects. So it would look much more like Figure 7-4. You'd have the
big substitution effect when the wage goes up and a small offsetting income effect. Think about the
woman who is not working at all. She's now working at all at $8 an hour. You raise her wage to $12 an
hour. She's like, hey, I wasn't working at all. So there's no income effect. But now I'm going to go to work
and make some money. So it's upward sloping. 
But for men, it's going to look more potentially like Figure 7-5. There's a small substitution effect but a
potentially big income effect or bigger than women. Now, how big it is, that's not clear. Because, once
again, men have nothing to do if they don't work. So it could be this ends up being bigger and smaller.
It's not clear how big this ends up being. But it's at least possible that you could have men having a
backward-bending or downward sloping labor supply curve. Because the income effect could even more
than offset the substitution effect.
But, in reality, given the way I set up the example, you'd think men would basically have a pretty
inelastic labor supply. You'd think, 40 years ago, these things would basically both be 0, both offset. And,
basically, you'd have a situation where the change in the wages didn't matter much for men.
And, in fact, that's what people found. This is a wonderful case of the convergence of truth with theory
and a wonderful chance to see the power of some pretty simplistic theory. The intuition is exactly borne
out in the data, which is males, 40 years ago, would have a very inelastic labor supply. Their labor supply
curves were virtually vertical and maybe backward-bending. There's some controversy on that. Some
estimates got backward-bending. Some didn't. But there were certainly not upward sloping. It was
basically vertical.
Women had a very few elastic labor supply. The elasticity is estimated to be around 1. That is every 1%
change in the wage lead to 1% more labor supply. So that's a fairly elastic labor supply for women.
Where, for men, the estimate was basically 0. And that's kind of neat, because we're actually getting
confirmation in the data of what the theory would have told us.
Now, someone else tell me what do you think has happened over the last 40 years relative to these
elasticities of married men and married women. Yeah.
AUDIENCE: The elasticity of married women has gone down in the last 40 years--
PROFESSOR: Why? Speak up so the class can hear you. Why is that?
AUDIENCE: Because women work more often now than they did before. 
PROFESSOR: Women work more often now. So the income effect is going to be getting bigger for them.
So the income effect is going up, because their initial h is bigger. Plus there's actually now, in some
sense, less good opportunities if you're not working.
So when we had our first kid, and we lived in Brookline, which is sort of an urban city, and my wife
decided to stay at home, she didn't have moms to hang out with. It was just nannies at the park. And it
wasn't that much fun. And so, basically, the substitution effect is shrinking, because the outside options
aren't quite as good as they were, as the norms shift towards work.
Whereas for men, actually it's becoming more normal for men to be engaged in child care. My best
friend is a stay-at-home dad. It's becoming more normal for that to happen. And so the substitution
effect is rising. It's not implausible that if you cut a man's wage down, he'll just say forget it. My wife's
going to work. I'm taking care of the kids. That would be socially ostracizing 40 years ago. But it's not
that odd now.
And, likewise, as men are less engaged in the labor force and spending more time at home, their income
effects are falling, because their initial h is smaller. So you're getting a convergence in these labor supply
elasticities.
What really seems to be happening is mostly convergence down for women, not much up for men. So
men are maybe going from 0 to 0.1. Women are coming from like 1 to 1/2. So what you're seeing is that
men aren't actually working that much less. There's a few stay-at-home dads. But they're still not the
majority. Women are working a lot more, and kids are in child care a lot more.
So what you're seeing over time is you're seeing men being a little more responsive, but not that much
more responsive. They're still, basically, working all the time. Women are working a lot more and being
more responsive to wages. And there's a reduction coming in both women's leisure and production of
child care at home.
Now, that raises a very interesting question of is this is a good thing? Now this is a very deep and hard
topic. In economics, we think if people do something it's good, or they wouldn't have done it. It is true
that if you look at data on self-reported well-being or happiness data, married women report a general
decline in happiness, over the last 40 years, as they've entered the labor force more and more. 
And the issue is, is this something which is a good way for society to spend its resources, to have
everyone working? We're consuming more. Consumption has gone up. We're consuming more, but
we're getting less leisure as a family. Because the men aren't working that much less. The women are
working a lot more. So we're getting less leisure as a family. How do we feel about that outcome. That's
an interesting question. And we'll talk about that some more later on in the semester./ OK. Questions
about this? Yeah.
AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE PHRASE].
PROFESSOR: That's a really good question. And let me talk about that for a couple of minutes. The
definition of unemployment is those employed over looking for work. If the number of people employed
does not change, and women suddenly want to work, and they report to surveyors that they're looking
for work-- that's the employment rate. I'm sorry.
The unemployment rate-- I'm sorry-- is going to be those looking over employed. My bad. The
unemployment rate is going to be those looking over those employed. So the unemployment rate is how
many people are looking for work over how many are employed. If women start suddenly looking for
work, and there's no jobs to be had, that will raise the unemployment rate.
So one thing that's been a focus of a lot of research has been do increases in the supply of labor lead to
increases in unemployment? What you've expressed is what's often called the lump of labour view. The
lump of labour view is basically the view that there's a fixed box of production in the economy. And as
more workers come in to fill that box, there will be more unemployment.
The alternative view is that the economy is dynamic. And as more women are working, and earning
income, and buying stuff, that makes more jobs. So our standard of consumption is way higher than 40
years ago. We all have much cooler stuff than 40 years ago. You have no idea how bad life sucked 40
years ago. We have way better stuff. We have that stuff, because women are working and making the
income to buy it, which means people have to make it which makes jobs.
So, in fact, the existing evidence is labor supply shocks do not cause unemployment increases. This is
something I've worked a lot on. What you see, a very interesting case is in Europe. In the US and all over 
the world, we have assistance of what we call Social Security, a term you've all heard, I'm sure. The
Social Security program is a program which provides income when you're retired. So it provides income
when you're retired to help you deal with the fact that you don't have a source of labor income
anymore. And that's a program that virtually every country, and all developed countries have a very
generous social security program.
But they're different in the US than in other countries. In the US, the way the social security program
works is when you hit 62, you get a choice. You can stop working and get your benefits from Social
Security, and then you get them every year until you die. Or you can keep working, delay getting your
benefits, but they'll increase what you get to offset the delay. So, in other words, if I retire at 63 rather
than 62, given that I'm going to die at the same date, I'm going to get one fewer year of benefits in my
life. But they raise them by 6.7% to compensate for that. So I get one fewer year of benefits, but every
year it's 6.7% higher. And it turns out, given life expectancy, that works out to be a roughly fair deal.
So, basically, at 62, your choice is I can get one more year of benefits or I get higher benefits for one
fewer years. And that's a choice that's a roughly fair deal. OK. Questions about that? Am I making sense
of that?
In Europe, it's not a fair deal. In Europe the way it works is they say, you can get one more year of
benefits. But if you decide to work this year, we're not given you any more in the future.
So let me describe how it works in the Netherlands. At age 55, the Netherlands says, if you decide to
retire this year, we will replace 90% of your wages in social security payments to make sure your income
doesn't suffer when you retire. If you don't retire and work, you're going to give up sitting at home
earning 90% of your wage. That is the opportunity cost of working. It's that you have forgone the ability
to sit at home and get 90% of your wage. So what is your net wage if you work? 10% of what you would
have earned.
So if you're earning $20 an hour, then your choice is you can sit at home for $18 or work for $20 an
hour. So your net wage for working is $2 an hour. The return to work, the opportunity cost of leisure is
only $2 an hour. You're only forgoing $2 an hour by sitting at home.
But wait, there's more. If you sit at home, you don't have to pay the payroll taxes of financing the
system that are almost 50%. If you work, you have to pay the payroll taxes. Which means that if you 
work, you lose money. Because if you work, you forgo getting to sit at home at 90% of your wage, and
you pay a tax that's about 40% of your wages. So, actually, you will lose 30% of your salary by working
relative to sitting at home.
Guess what people do in the Netherlands at 55? They sit at home. No one works after 55 in the
Netherlands on the books. They work off the books painting houses and doing odd jobs. No one works
on the books after 55. Economics works, guys. If you pay your guys to stay at home, they stay at home.
Now, if you ask European politicians, why do you have this screwed up system? They'll say, well, it's
easy. We want to get those old guys out to make jobs for the young guys. We need to pay those old guys
to stay at home to make jobs for the young guys.
And then you point out, have you noticed that Europe has higher unemployment than American, even
though we don't do that and you do? And that's because you're wrong. It doesn't work that way.
Because by paying the old guys to sit at home, you have to have such high taxes that no one makes new
businesses. And so there's not jobs for the young guys to have.
So it's true. In theory, you've made jobs for the young guys by leaving the old guys at home. But by
imposing the 40% tax rate that you've had to impose to make it possible to pay the old guys to sit at
home, you've killed job creation in your country. And, as a result, there's not the jobs for young guys to
get.
That's a very long-winded way of answering your question that supply, in substance, creates its own
demand. So more labor supply will not necessarily cause more unemployment.
And we're going to talk about one more thing before we stop. I've just talked about a vast empirical
literature in how people understand the effects of wages on labor supply. Well, how do they do it? Well,
you could say, look, we can just look at how you earn a higher wage than you do. And we'll ask, do you
work harder than you? And we'll say, the guys who earn higher wages work harder. If guys who earn
higher wages work harder, that means labor supply slopes up. If guys who earn higher wages don't work
harder, that means labor supply slopes down. What's wrong with that? Yeah. 
AUDIENCE: Those who are getting paid more probably are getting paid because they want to work
harder.
PROFESSOR: Yeah. Maybe you guys are different. Maybe you're talented, and you're not. And maybe
because you're talented, maybe you're driven, and you're not. And because you're driven, you work
harder and get paid a higher wage.
So I'm not learning anything about the causal effect of the wage on your labor supply. I've just
documented a correlation between wage and labor supply. How can we get the causal effect of your
wage on your labor supply?
Well, once again, ideally we'd run an experiment. We'd assign you a higher wage. We'd find someone
just like you. Not you, you're not driven. We find someone just like you. No offense. You know I'm
joking. We'd find someone just like you and, randomly, by a flip of a coin, assign them a lower wage. And
we'd see how your labor supply differed.
Now, it seems like you couldn't do that. But, in fact, the US did that. In the 1970s, we ran what was
called the negative income tax experiment where we literally assigned people different wage rates
through taxing them by different amounts. And that was part of what gave us this very convincing
evidence from 40 years ago of these responses. So where we get this is from a real experiment we ran
40 years ago.
The problem is that's a pretty hard experiment to run. It's pretty expensive, and there's some ethical
issues. So what do you do today to estimate that? What you can do today is say, well, we can't run the
experiment. But the government runs it for us every time they change tax rates.
Because if you take two people that are identical-- so let's say you and you were identical-- and I change
your tax rate because you live in Massachusetts. I don't change your tax rate because you live in New
York. I can see what happens to you relative to you. Because I've now essentially run this experiment by
the government changing someone's tax rate and not someone else's. That's the way we do it if we can't
run a true, randomized experiment. And that gives very, very similar answers. 
Let me stop there. And we will come back. Next lecture we'll talk about applying this model. So I guess in
section on Friday, we review for the exam. In section on Friday, we review for the exam. So show up to
that. And the exam is next week. The exam will cover through my next lecture./